---
layout: post
title: "Personal Investing: how a Vacation Property can Sink your Portfolio"
description: "A beautiful vacation property sounds like a win-win. But what is your real honest ROI?"
date: 2025-11-03
categories: [investing]
author: "Duncan Miller"
---

Owning a vacation property like a timeshare or AirBnB might sound like paradise, but investing here is not just “buy a sunset view and it appreciates.” It’s a nuanced landscape of high cost, regulatory quirks, tourism dependencies and local-market dynamics. If you’re considering putting money into real estate, short-term rentals, business ownership or export ventures, here’s a clear look at what works, what’s risky, and how to analyse your ROI.

If you buy a property and hold it, you might realistically expect ~4-6% annual return from rent + appreciation in many cases. But if you buy at a premium (for view, location), your “yield” (cash flow) may be much lower. Using a 5% cap rate benchmark, you’d need a very good deal to make it cash‐flow comfortably.
Also, if you buy hoping for “skyrocketing appreciation,” remember ~6% annual long‐term is a healthy expectation—not 20% year after year.

2. Airbnb / Vacation Rental: Are You Actually Making Money?

Many investors look to short‐term rentals (STRs) or “Airbnb” style leasing. Let’s dig into the data and the pitfalls.

STRs don’t automatically yield high “cash‐flow” unless the purchase price and all costs are factored well.

High nightly rates and occupancy help, but costs (management, cleaning, turnover, marketing, local regulation, furnishings) are also high.

If you buy a property at a view/prime location premium, your initial cost may kill yield.

What to ask / items to model

What is the net income after all direct costs (mortgage, tax, insurance, utilities, management, cleaning, vacancy) – not just “top line revenue”?

What is the occupancy trend (off-season vs peak season)?


What is the “price paid” vs “yield”? If you pay $1M for a property and get $60K revenue, after minus costs you might have very slim cash‐flow.

Are you buying for “income” or “appreciation + personal use”? If income is primary, treat it as a business.

Conclusion on Airbnb/STR
Yes, you can make money via STR on a vacation property. But don’t assume “holiday‐home + Airbnb = automatic windfall.” Unless you do your homework, you may get modest returns or negative cash flow once all costs are accounted.
If you’re looking for yield (cash income) rather than just appreciation + occasional use, traditional long‐term rentals may actually offer more stable ROI in certain locations.

3. Timeshare / Fractional Ownership: Why This Often Looks Like a Bad Investment

Timeshares are common in vacation destinations, as well as the hard pitch: people buy into resorts, fractional ownership, etc. But from an investment point of view the structure often works against the owner in terms of cash‐return.

Facts & observations

The timeshare industry generates significant economic output (jobs, taxes) but that doesn’t mean individual timeshare owners get strong investment returns. For example a 2025 study: Hawaii’s timeshares generated $5.3 billion in output statewide, but that describes industry impact—not owner ROI.

Many timeshare offerings are structured for lifestyle (vacation use) not primarily for profit. Ownership carries ongoing fees (maintenance, special assessments) which reduce net returns.

Resale value tends to be weak: timeshares typically don’t appreciate like real property, especially when you factor in costs and restrictions.

Why it’s often a “bad investment” from a purely financial lens

- High upfront cost + ongoing fees = elevated holding cost.
- Returns are modest or even negative if you factor in cost of personal use vs rental income.
- Liquidity and resale are limited
- If your motivation is investment return, timeshare is rarely optimal compared to other investments.

When timeshare might make sense

If your primary objective is lifestyle: regular use of the property, family vacations, and you accept limited financial upside.

If you’re okay with low (or negative) “investment yield” in exchange for personal benefit.

Bottom line
Treat timeshare more as “lifestyle purchase” than “investment vehicle.” If you buy expecting strong ROI like a rental income-property, you’ll often be disappointed.

4. Small Business + Export / Service Ventures

Beyond property, there are opportunities (and risks) in owning or starting businesses in a tourist area: local services (lawyer, contractor, trades), tourism support businesses, niche export/agribusiness.

Local Services & Trades

Services such as legal practices, contracting, home-services (remodeling, maintenance, landscaping) may benefit from the location's property base (vacation homes + high end homes) and tourism infrastructure.

Advantage: You are providing needed services in a market where imports/travel raise costs and local support is valued.

Risk: Island economy is subject to tourism cycles + high local cost of living/high wages in certain segments + supply chain/logistics issues (island shipping).

Export/Agribusiness / Diversification

If you’re exporting local products or services (agriculture, specialty foods, aquaculture, ocean-sports tourism gear), you can leverage local uniqueness; but you face logistics/costs/regulation.

Small businesses tied to export or unique natural resources may unlock higher upside if well executed, but also higher risk (markets outside the island, shipping, regulatory, scale).

What to evaluate for a local business or export venture

Is there a local comparative advantage (unique resource, location, niche) or are you just replicating a mainland business in Hawaii (which may carry a cost disadvantage)?

What are the fixed and variable costs (shipping, labor, utilities, island logistics)?

Is your market local (serving Big Island residents/tourists) or export/scale (serving national/international markets)? The latter offers more growth but often more risk.

Are you aligned with tourism trends (which dominate the island economy) or diversification trends (less tourism-dependent)?

How sensitive is your business to external shocks (tourist downturn, volcanic/earthquake/lava risk, shipping disruption)?

Summary
Service or trades businesses in high-end real estate or tourism-connected markets can be solid investments. Export or niche local product businesses offer higher growth potential, but also require scale, logistics and market access. If you’re looking to invest or start a business on the Big Island, thinking local + niche + value proposition is key.

5. Putting It Together: What Should YOU Do?

Here are questions and a decision framework to help you choose the best “investment path” for you on the Big Island:

Ask yourself:

Am I after cash income (yield) or capital appreciation (long-term hold)?

How much liquidity risk am I willing to accept (island assets are less liquid than mainland)?

What level of involvement do I want (hands‐on business vs passive property investment)?

How much risk am I comfortable with (tourism cycles, regulation, natural hazard risk)?

Do I want a lifestyle component (vacation home, timeshare) or purely an investment return focus?

How does being on an island impact costs: shipping, materials, labor, regulation, risk of environmental events (lava zones, storms)?

Which path might suit you:

If you want relatively lower effort + lower return + stable location: consider long‐term rental real estate, small property in a stable area, service business aligned with local demand.

If you’re comfortable with higher risk + higher reward: short‐term rental in prime location with high occupancy, niche export business or local product, or a service business with scale ambition.

If you value lifestyle first and investment second: maybe a vacation home/ timeshare with some rental usage—but treat it as lifestyle, not a high-yield investment.

If you buy property expecting high yield from short-term rental without modelling costs and regulation: you might be disappointed.

Steps to proceed:

Pick a sub-market on the Big Island (Hilo vs Kona coast vs mountain zone). Each has different cost structure, tourist demand, regulation.

Model the numbers: purchase price + closing + holding costs + expected rental/ business income + vacancy/repair costs + tax/insurance + exit assumptions.

Sensitivity test: What happens if occupancy drops by 20%? What if rates drop 10%? What if regulation tightens?

Understand local zoning / STR regulation / business licensing.

Consider local risks: volcanic activity, remote location, shipping delays, higher cost of maintenance/labor.

Have an exit strategy: If you buy property, how easy will you sell if you need to? If you start a business, what does ramp-up look like and is it scalable or sell-able?

6. Final Word

The Big Island offers unique opportunities: beautiful location, tourism influx, niche resources and local business demand. But “investment in paradise” is not a guarantee of outsized return—costs are high, yield often modest, risks significant.
If you do your homework, align your investment path with your goals (income vs appreciation), model realistically (not just dream of 20% returns), and understand the island-specific dynamics (logistics, regulation, tourism cycles), you can make smart decisions.

But don’t buy into the idea that a view = automatic return. On this island, as elsewhere, you still get what you put in—so put in informed planning, realistic models, local awareness.
